\" dwn.1 manpage
\" .TH DWN 1 16\ May\ 2016 KLM Kurt\ Manion\'s\ Documentation
.Dd 16 May 2016
.Dt DWN 1
.Os UNIX
.Sh NAME
.Nm dwn
.Nd manipulate file most recently added to a directory
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl o | Fl m Ar destination | Fl M
.Nm
.Op Fl r
.Op Fl R Ar delimiter
.Nm
.Op Ar action
.Op Fl d Ar directory
.Op Fl n Ar num_files
.Op Fl f Ar flags
.Nm
.Op Ar action
.Op Fl S Ar skip_expr | Fl s Ar skip_num
.Nm
.Op Ar action
.Op Fl g Ar grep_flags
.Op Fl e Ar regex
.Op Fl x Ar regex
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Using
.Nm
without any arguments outputs the path of the file most recently added
to the downloads directory,
which is obtained from
.Ev DOWNLOAD_DIR ,
or
.Ev DOWNLOADS
in that order.
A specific default directory for
.Nm
may be specified by
.Ev DWN_DIR .
If none of these are present in the enviroment
.Pa ~/Downloads
will be understood as the default.

Inlining usage of
.Nm
in other commands allows the user to manipulate the file with the full power of
their unix distribution.
A few convenience forms have been added for commonly used file manipulation
commands;
these actions are listed in the first synopsis line.
The following synopsis lines group options that control the way
.Nm
functions, and may be used with any of the actions enumerated in the first
synopsis line.
.Pp
Open the obtained filepaths with \fB\-o\fR.
Move the obtained filepaths to a specified directory with \fB\-m\fR.
The convenience form \fB\-M\fR moves the obtained filepaths to
the current directory.
.Pp
The second synopsis line contains the options that control the printing behavior.
The default printing behavior is to output the obtained filepaths delimited by a
newline character.
When inlining multiple filepaths from
.Nm
into another command's invocation
\fB\-r\fR may be used to delimit these filepaths with spaces rather than
newlines.
This is sometimes necessary for the command substitution to work on files which contain
characters that have specieal meaning for the shell.
This is not always necessary when piping
.Nm Ns 's
output to another program.
Any character whatsoever may be specified as the delimiter used for output with
\fB\-R\fR.
.Pp
The third synopsis line contains the options that control how the filepath is
obtained.
A directory other than the default may be specified with \fB\-d\fR.
The number of files to obtain may be specified with \fB\-n\fR.
Additional flags to be passed to the underlying command of the action form
before the filepath itself may be specified with \fB\-f\fR.
.Pp
The fourth synopsis line contains the options that allow one to skip over
certain files.
The \fB\-s\fR option, which is a convenience form for the more comprehensive
\fB\-S\fR option, takes a number and skips that many files that would have been
obtained.
This is useful for when one wishes to obtain a filepath or sequence of
filepaths that had been the most recent in a directory,
but, since then, have been pushed back by newer files.
The \fB\-S\fR option allows for more involved use cases.
.Pp
The fifth synopsis line contains the options that allow one to match 
filepaths with regular expressions.
Basic regular expressions are used unless the \fB\-gE\fR flag is passed.
See
.Xr re_format 7
for additional information on the difference between the types of regular
expressions.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl r , Fl Fl return
The return option forces
.Nm
to output the obtained filepath or filepaths with a space as delimitation,
rather than a newline, and enclose the filepaths with strong quotes.
This flag is necessary when using command substitution with a number of
filepaths.
.It Fl R Ar delim, Fl Fl print-delim Ns = Ns Ar delim
The following character
is used for delimitation between filepaths.
.It Fl o , Fl Fl open
The open option opens the obtained filepath or filepaths using
.Xr open 1
on Darwin and
.Xr xdg-open 1
on GNU Linux.
.It Fl m Ar dest, Fl Fl move Ns = Ns Ar dest
The move option moves the obtained filepath or filepaths to the specified
directory.
By default it does not overwrite files.
.It Fl M , Fl Fl move-here
An alias for
.Sq dwn \-m Ns \ . .
Moves the obtained filepath or filepaths to the current working directory.
By default it does not overwrite files.
.It Fl d Ar dir , Fl Fl directory Ns = Ns Ar dir
This overrides the default directory,
usually
.Pa ~/Downloads ,
from which the selection is obtained.
.It Fl h , Fl Fl here
Similar to
.Sq \-d.
in that the current directory is searched
rather than the download directory,
but, additionally, expands the obtained path,
rather than emiting the relative path.
.It Fl n Ar num , Fl Fl repetitions Ns = Ns Ar num
Given a numeric argument, instead of obtaining a filepath,
.Nm
obtains the specified number of files.
If there are less than that number of files in the directory
.Nm
obtains what is available.
.It Fl f Ar flags , Fl Fl flags Ns = Ns Ar flags
The string of options and flags following \fB\-f\fR are passed to the command
.Nm
will use on the obtained filepath or filepaths.
.It Fl S Ar expr , Fl Fl skip-expr Ns = Ns Ar expr
The skip option takes an expression,
which is a comma separated list
whose element is either an address or a range of addresses.
These signify which files should be skipped when making the selection of
filepaths.
The address
.Sq 1
signifies the first file.
Only the first range may omit its lower bound;
this will skip the first n files, where n is the upper bound.
If the upper bound is ommited, or is
.Sq $ ,
the range has the significance of being the rest of the addresses starting at
the lower bound.
The skip expression may be prefixed with a
\(ga:',
a
.Sq ^ ,
or both in any order.
Prefixing the expression with a
\(ga:'
causes the list following it to be interpreted as a pattern
that repeats once the highest bound is reached.
This, then, has no effect if the highest bound is
.Sq $ .
Prefixing the expression with a
.Sq ^
negates the significance of the list following it,
such that it does not specify which files are to be skipped
but, rather, selected.
.It Fl s Ar num , Fl Fl skip-num Ns = Ns Ar num
Given a number, that number of files are skipped.
This is the same as
.Sq \-S "\-n" ,
where n is the number passed to \fB\-s\fR.
.It Fl e Ar regex , Fl Fl filter Ns = Ns Ar regex
Only files matching the regular expression following will be selected.
Multiple \fB\-e\fR flags may be passed to broaden the search.
.It Fl x Ar regex , Fl Fl exclude Ns = Ns Ar regex
Files matching the regular expression following are ommited from the
selection.
.It Fl g Ar flags , Fl Fl grep-flags Ns = Ns Ar flags
The flags following \fB\-g\fR are passed to
.Xr grep 1 .
For convenience the initial dash may be omitted.
The flag \fB\-gv\fR may not be specified;
use \fB\-x\fR as opposed to \fB\-e\fR for this functionality.
A selection of uses are:
\fB\-gE\fR (use extended regular expressions);
\fB\-gi\fR (ignore case); and
\fB\-gx\fR (match the regular expression to the whole line).
See the
.Xr grep 1
manpage for a full listing of options which may be passed to grep.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Print out the filepath most recently added to the desktop:
.Dl dwn \-d~/Desktop
.Pp
Print the file's contents to the command-line:
.Dl dwn \-d~/Desktop | cat \-
.Pp
Open the most recently downloaded file:
.Dl dwn \-o
.Pp
Open the most recently downloaded file without the convenience form:
.Dl open `dwn`
.Pp
Open the five most recently downloaded files without the convenience form:
.Dl eval open `dwn \-rn5`
.Pp
Move the most recently downloaded file to the Documents folder:
.Dl dwn \-m~/Documents
.Pp
Move the five most recently downloaded files to the Documents folder.
.Dl dwn \-m~/Documents \-n5
.Pp
Print out ten total filepaths, but skip a few that would otherwise have been
printed:
.Dl dwn \-n10 \-S Ns Qq 2-5,8
.Pp
Print out the third and fifth filepath:
.Dl dwn \-S Ns Qq ^3,5
.Pp
Print out every other file in the directory in order of their creation:
.Dl dwn \-S Ns Qq :2
.Pp
Print out the five most recently created text files
.Dl dwn \-n5 \-e'\.txt'
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag
.It DWN_DIR
May be used to specify a default directory specifically for
.Nm .
This has highest precedence.
.It Ev DOWNLOAD_DIR
The directory path contained therein is used as the default download
directory.
This has precedence over
.Ev DOWNLOADS .
When set to the empty string
.Pa ~/Downloads
is used.
.It DOWNLOADS
A secondary environment variable checked if
.Ev DOWNLOAD_DIR
is unset.
.El
.Sh AUTHOR 
dwn was created by
.An Kurt L. Manion
on 3 April 2016.
.Sh CONTACT
.Aq klmanion@gmail.com .
.Sh VERSION
version 3.8.0 \(em 20 February 2019.
